About the Office of Science and Technology Policy The Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) was established by the National Science and Technology Policy, Organization, and Priorities Act of 1976 to provide the President and others within the Executive Office of the President with advice on the scientific, engineering, and technological aspects of the economy, national security, homeland security, health, foreign relations, the environment, and the technological recovery and use of resources, among other topics. OSTP leads interagency science and technology policy coordination efforts, assists the Office of Management and Budget with an annual review and analysis of federal research and development in budgets, and serves as a source of scientific and technological analysis and judgment for the President with respect

The National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) is the principal means by which the Executive Branch coordinates science and technology policy across the diverse entities that make up the federal research and development enterprise. A primary objective of the NSTC is to ensure science and technology policy decisions and programs are consistent with the President s stated goals. The NSTC prepares research and development strategies that are coordinated across federal agencies aimed at accomplishing multiple national goals. The work of the NSTC is organized under committees that oversee subcommittees and working groups focused on different aspects of science and technology.

The Arctic Research and Policy Act of 1984 (ARPA), Public Law 98-373, July 31, 1984, as amended, pro - vides for a comprehensive national policy dealing with national research needs and objectives in the Arctic. ARPA establishes an Arctic Research Commission (USARC) and an Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee (IARPC) to help implement the Act. A Presidential Memorandum issued in 2010 made the NSTC responsible for IARPC.

This report represents the updated Implementation Plan for 2025 and 2026 under the 2022-2026 Arctic Research Plan. Originally published in December 2024, it was developed by IARPC and is published by OSTP .

Capacity Building Foundation Activity title has been changed to Education and Training. Removing Capacity Building reflects the strong capacity that exists within communities across the Arctic and refocuses efforts to training researchers.

Leadership in Research Foundational Area in this update.

Implementation Plan: Document developed every two years that outlines specific objectives and deliverables that will be completed in the subsequent two years.

Convergence Research: Investigations driven by a specific and compelling problem that requires deep integration across disciplines.

Deliverable: Tangible, measurable, and easily communicated research product that demonstrates progress made toward satisfying the objectives and goals and is made available to relevant decisionmakers and partners. Deliverables may also include achievements resulting from the establishment of new relationships.

Foundational Activity: Activity that relates to, supports, and informs the priority areas. Foundational activities are critical to improving research and better addressing each of the priority areas.

Goal: Intended convergent research outcome that is realized from federal investment and non-federal partner efforts.

Lead Agency/Agencies: The federal agency or agencies responsible for leading priority areas.

Objective: Specific research action that advances the goals.

Policy Driver: Underlying U.S. Arctic and research policy that guides the development of the plan.

Priority Area: Broad cross-cutting theme that needs additional research, supports one or more policy drivers, meets the mission and interests of more than one federal agency, and engages multiple existing communities of practice and non-federal partners.

In December 2021, the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy released the Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee (IARPC) s Arctic Research Plan 2022 2026. The Arctic Research Plan is a high-level research strategy to address emerging research questions about the dynamic, changing Arctic, presenting a research framework with thematic goals and outlining a vision for federal agencies.

Beyond this is identifies pathways to strengthen relationships between federal agencies and Arctic communities, academia, non-federal researchers, the state of Alaska, Indian Tribes4 , nonprofits, the private sector (including Alaska Native Corporations), and international organizations.

In order for IARPC to respond more swiftly to emerging and immediate needs, while continuing to sup - port U.S. Arctic policy, the Arctic Research Plan is advanced through implementation plans that are updated every two years. This new implementation plan is focused on 2025 and 2026. It includes objec - tives, which are specific research actions, as well as deliverables, which are tangible, measurable, and easily communicated actions and research products. Many of the objectives and deliverables identify interconnected and cross-cutting research and illustrate areas where it is critical for informing management and decision-making. For example, many focus on research around infrastructure and food security, themes that thread throughout its priority areas and foundational activities.

This Implementation Plan 2025-2026 provides specific actions that IARPC and its member agencies will take to pursue research aimed at improving community resilience and well-being, advancing scientific understanding of ongoing changes in the Arctic system, creating more sustainable economies and live - lihoods, and improving risk management and hazard mitigation. Results of these concerted efforts will yield greater predictive capabilities and improved capacity for more informed decisions and adaptation to other pressing environmental and societal changes. Deliverables outlined in this plan are subject to the availability of federal funds and agency staff capacity.

The Arctic Research Plan adheres to four critical policy drivers in U.S. Arctic research policy that reflect long-standing and ongoing U.S. interests in the Arctic and the collective priorities of IARPC federal agencies: Well-Being, Stewardship, Security, and Arctic-Global Systems. The plan includes four priority areas with thematic goals that (1) represent broad, cross-cutting themes that need additional research; (2) support one or more policy drivers; (3) meet the mission and interests of more than one federal agency; and (4) engage multiple existing communities of practice and non-federal partners. Priority Arctic Systems Interactions: Enhance the ability to observe, understand, predict, and project the Arctic s dynamic interconnected systems and their links to the Earth system.

Community Resilience and Health: Improve community resilience and well-being by strengthening research and developing tools to increase understanding of interdependent social, natural, and built systems in the Arctic.

United States was formed. The U.S. Supreme Court has consistently recognized Congress s special obligations toward Tribes, underscoring that tribal classifications are political rather than racial. The federal government has entered into agreements which established a unique trust responsibility with Indian Tribes, which include federally-recognized tribes in Alaska as well as Alaska Native Corporations, Alaska Native Organizations, and Alaska Native Villages. Relevant authorities are listed at

that promotes an understanding of disaster risk exposure, sensitivity to hazard, and adaptive capacity.

Sustainable Economies and Livelihoods: Observe and understand the Arctic s natural, social, and built systems to promote sustainable economies and livelihoods.

In addition to identifying four priority areas, the Arctic Research Plan 2022-2026 builds upon five foundational activities. These activities are critical to achieving the priority area goals and are likely to re - main foundational to Arctic research beyond the five-year duration of the Arctic Research Plan. Foundational activities are: Data Management; Education and Training; Monitoring, Observing, Modeling, and Prediction; Technology Innovation and Application; and Tribal Consultation and Effective Processes.

Progress in Arctic research will remain incomplete without training researchers and others in respectful and meaningful engagement with the communities that live in the Arctic. This includes listening to communities about how and when federal investments should be made, and celebrating with and learning from communities when progress is made.

Throughout the development of the Arctic Research Plan 2022-2026 and its implementation plans, IARPC has been guided by the following overarching principles: 1. Sustained Engagement: Advance respectful, responsive, and continuous engagement with Tribal organizations, Arctic communities, federal agencies, the state of Alaska, and non-federal partners.

2. Fairness: Ensure that everyone is treated fairly and respectfully, and promote access by all to the tools needed to succeed.

3. Transparency: Commit to activities and decisions that are transparent and communicated clearly and in accessible formats.

These principles are woven through the work of all Arctic Research Plan objectives and will continue to guide all implementation activities.

IARPC s work under the Implementation Plan 2025-2026 will be carried out by IARPC priority area collaboration teams, foundational activity collaboration teams, and communities of practice. These are all open to anyone wishing to advance knowledge about the Arctic. Teams may include members from federal, state, academic, nonprofit, private sector, Tribal, community, and international organizations. IARPC collaboration teams direct and coordinate activities to reach the plan goals, ensure coordination and collaboration across agencies, and engage non-federal partners. These multidisciplinary teams are co-led by at least two federal program managers and one non-federal partner and draw on federal agency and community of practice expertise to achieve their goals. As noted in update. The status of deliverables will be updated as needed on the IARPC Collaborations website The IARPC Collaborations website is a critical component of IARPC and serves as a hub for building connections and facilitating research among federal government program managers and scientists, pace of Arctic research and achieve priority area goals. IARPC Collaborations is used to facilitate implementation of the Arctic Research Plan and its periodic implementation plans. It supports the work of the collaboration teams and communities of practice, and provides a tool to track progress toward the plan deliverables.

Progress on objectives and deliverables will be continuously tracked using the IARPC Collaborations website. Any organization or individual that is a member of IARPC Collaborations may report actions towards a deliverable.

In the fall of 2026, team leads will develop statements summarizing the impacts of the research conducted and how it ties to the goals of the Arctic Research Plan. Impact statements will be used to pro - duce a public report to Congress. This and future reports to Congress will help the public, research, and policy communities understand the progress, obstacles, and pathways toward achievement of goals in implementation plans. They will also demonstrate connections and responsiveness to the U.S. Arctic Research Commission s Biennial Goals Report.

The IARPC implementation plans build from the strong collaboration teams and communities of prac - tice formed around disciplinary and multidisciplinary research areas. As implementation proceeds, and as future Arctic research plans are developed, these communities of practice will become increasingly integrated in order to best respond to the complex, dynamic, and interconnected changes occurring in the Arctic.

IARPC recognizes the importance of working with entities across all sectors to achieve the goals of the Arctic Research Plan and the implementation plan objectives and deliverables. While the Arctic Re - search Plan and this implementation plan are developed to help guide federal research investments and collaboration, non-federal entities also play critical roles in Arctic research. Over the next two years, IARPC aims to build and strengthen relationships and to incorporate non-federal partners into research collaboration teams as leaders and participants.

Achievement of all deliverables is contingent on Federal funding and agency staff capacity in Fiscal Years 2025 and 2026.

For some deliverables (shown in grey), agency leadership and participation is pending as of May 2025. Updated status for all deliverables can be associated connections with lower latitudes.

Arctic amplification is the accelerated warming of the Arctic compared to the rest of the Earth. It is the result of feedbacks and interactions within the Arctic system and interactions between the Arctic and lower latitudes. Work under this objective will focus on increasing understanding of Arctic amplification, including processes that contribute to it (e.g., sea ice albedo feedback), the interactions between changes in the Arctic and lower latitude weather and climate (e.g., transport of heat, moisture, salinity, and pollutants), and changes in the Arctic that are a result of this amplification (e.g., changes in extreme events in the Arctic). This objective will enhance understanding of Arctic systems interactions by emphasizing connections among atmospheric, oceanic, and cryospheric components of the Arctic system with the use of appropriate models, observations, and data. Changes in the Arctic that are of direct relevance to natural hazards influencing communities and the commercial sector will be considered.

Changes in the Arctic are having profound impacts on terrestrial, aquatic, and marine ecosystems. For example, ocean primary productivity in nearly all regions of the Arctic is higher than in the past, which can be linked to lower sea ice cover and increased nutrient availability. Terrestrial ecosystems are also experiencing changes resulting from a variety of factors such extended growing seasons, earlier snow melt, altered precipitation patterns, and changing disturbance regimes. These changes in Arctic ecosys - tems have impacts on local human populations, as well as the Earth system as a whole.

In order to understand Arctic systems interactions, it is important to focus on the spaces where these interactions occur. Coastal areas are important zones of interaction across a wide range of social ecological systems: atmosphere, ocean, sea ice, land-fast ice, land, glaciers, permafrost, animals, plants, and humans all interact at and around coastlines. Work carried out under this objective seeks to build better understanding of the interconnected pieces and processes contributing to Arctic coastal change and its multifaceted impacts, both proximal and relational. This objective includes short-term and long-term activities, and relies on a variety of observation types, including community observers and high-tech sensors. Deliverables will facilitate expanded connectivity and standardization of observations with the aim of bridging gaps between interconnecting Arctic systems and between observations and models.

This objective focuses on building a broad, interconnected understanding of Arctic coastal change and working with Arctic communities to provide knowledge important for Arctic residents now, especially in responding to and mitigating the effects of change, and to build environmental understanding for the future.

and IARPC Collaborations meetings, highlight results from missions that contribute to long-term observations of land ice.NASA (lead); models for better prediction of sea level rise.NASA (lead); field, laboratory, and remote sensing studies to examine and quantify relationships processes in permafrost soils, and humans.

terrestrial and subsea permafrost degradation and their roles in environmental and at the interface of ocean, land, and atmo - sphere by supporting targeted collaborations among model developers, users, and interagency scientific peer-reviewed publisearch on public health needs and delivery.

The COVID-19 pandemic is a stark reminder of the vulnerability of rural communities in the Arctic to infectious disease. Public health resources are limited in many communities, and services such as preventive care and health education are often lacking. Cultural wellness is also a vital component of community resilience and health. Through this objective, IARPC seeks to support the health of Arctic residents with research on public health needs and delivery. This research will be driven by community priorities, culturally responsive and respectful, and focused foremost on improving the health of Arctic residents.

Terrestrial and marine ecosystems are changing rapidly with implications for accessibility and availability of healthy, nutritious, and culturally relevant foods. Environmental toxins and novel diseases also pose emerging risks to food security for Arctic residents. Both traditional and commercial foods, and the infrastructure to store and maintain them, play key roles in meeting communities nutritional and cultural needs. Improved observations, forecasts, and models are critical for a greater understanding of how Arctic environmental change and other factors are affecting Arctic food safety and security, including traditional food abundance, access, use patterns, and cultural connections and reliance.

The characteristics of the Arctic present unique water and sanitation infrastructure challenges. Solutions to these challenges need to address small and remote communities, energy availability and cost, operation and maintenance capabilities, freezing seasonal temperatures and thawing permafrost, and other issues. Through this objective, IARPC agencies and partners will analyze and evaluate potential impacts of environmental changes on infrastructure, synthesize available infrastructure solutions applicable to Arctic conditions and conduct research to support climate resilient and energy efficient infrastructure, provide a database for information on and treatment options for drinking water contaminants, and sup - port research on perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) treatment of surface water and groundwater in Arctic conditions.

maps of areas at high risk for coastal ero - match environmental and financial settings.

The goal is to better understand the threats to Alaska communities from acute and long-term hazards as well as what level of community intervention (adaptation, mitigation, and/or other protective measures) are in place. This will lead to identifying and developing an index of threat risk and community capacity for the variety of risks that Alaska s villages face.

the state of Alaska that should be included lish a data collection and collation plan to data that may not be readily available.Denali Commission hazards pose a risk to Arctic communities.Denali Commission infrastructure to withstand potential impacts from acute and long-term hazards.

This objective seeks to identify resilient infrastructure capabilities and technologies that can minimize infrastructure risk and reduce the impacts of hazards.

Environmental changes in the Arctic have increased global pressure to transform and expand Arctic economies. However, sustainable pathways for achieving such transformation are not well under - stood. Transitioning undeveloped and under-developed locally accessible economic opportunities into sustainable economies will benefit from understanding effective support mechanisms (e.g., public and private funding) that can stimulate economic activity. Particularly important fast-growing economic sectors include healthcare and infrastructure development. Federal investment in infrastructure can be a valuable economic stimulus, but research is needed to support the transition to sustainable economies. Improved socioeconomic models, studies on the transferability of successful place-based economic programs, and research on community-defined priorities for sustainable live - lihoods can provide insights for pathways towards more sustainable local job creation and retention while keeping the unique values of Arctic residents at the forefront.

all aspects of FAIR and CARE to support work products such as summaries and publicfacing one-pagers of perspectives on be a single-window search for the discovery of establishing tribally managed CAREstructured data centers. The goal is to Arctic observing and data systems plans.

Science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) education and training are foundational to success - ful research activities in the Arctic. The deliverables outlined here support existing and next generation practitioners in Arctic research and research-related policy careers in the U.S. Arctic.

Work under this objective will identify observational and modeling capability gaps that hamper predic - tive skill of models of the Arctic system, barriers that hold back progress in filling these gaps, and key activities most critical to improving predictability, including the need to maintain critical existing MOMP capabilities.

Significant activities in monitoring, observing, modeling, and prediction of the Arctic system are conducted by both federal and non-federal entities. Additionally, the Arctic is an important component of the broader Earth system, and Arctic monitoring, observing, modeling, and prediction activities should be coordinated with other federal interagency activities focused on observation and modeling of the Earth system. Work under this objective will strengthen monitoring, observing, modeling, and predic - tion capabilities for Arctic research by improving coordination and integration of Arctic observational and modeling activities conducted or supported by federal agencies with those conducted or enabled by non-federal partners and with broader federal Earth system activities.

The purpose of this objective is to identify, share, and implement best practices around Arctic observing and modeling activities and to make Arctic observational and modeling data more accessible.

Technology is a crosscutting challenge for Arctic researchers, as the Arctic setting requires dedicated investments in technology support to make research activities possible. As such, many IARPC collaboration teams and communities of practice highlight technology innovation and application as part of their work. The Technology Innovation and Application Collaboration Team is unique in its practical insight and know-how about technology development that transcends jurisdictional, disciplinary, geographic and sectoral boundaries.

All federal agencies are required to fulfill federal consultation policies and fulfill Trust obligations with Indian Tribes9 , in a way that honors Tribal sovereignty and self-determination. Federal agencies, depart - ments, and offices have independently developed Tribal consultation approaches, which has increased their number and led to inefficiencies for both agencies and Tribal communities and representatives. To address this inefficiency, for this implementation period IARPC will reframe this Foundational Area as Tribal Consultation and Effective Partnerships (TCEP). While many government actions requiring consultation are not related to research, IARPC agencies do engage in both formal Consultation as well as partnerships with Indian Tribes and communities.

focus on the statutory requirements for U.S. government Consultation and fulfillment of Trust obligations with federally recognized Indian Tribes. Indian Tribes is a broad term that includes federally recognized Tribes as well as Alaska Native Corporations and other organizations designated by federally recognized Tribes.

(1972); see also authorities listed at Consultation and Effective that have the largest volume of activities at obligations. Characterize the type of activities that fall into this category, and identify opportunities for coordination and efficiency as well as good practices and lessons and a clear outline of how community input This implementation plan is stewarded by the IARPC Principals, Staff Group, collaboration teams, and participating agencies and partners, with support from the IARPC Secretariat as funding and resources allow.

Collaboration: Priority area and foundational activity collaboration teams collaborate on and advance and knowledge necessary to meet the objectives and deliverables of this implementation plan.

Receive updates from collaboration teams on progress toward meeting implementation plan objectives and deliverables. Input from communities of practice will be received via the collaboration teams.Integrate across collaboration teams to facilitate progress toward objectives and deliverables.

Address challenges and opportunities brought forward by collaboration teams and communities of practice.

Evaluate, encourage, identify gaps and emerging research topics, and consider adjustments to implementation as necessary.

Prepare reports on activities under the implementation plan and assist as requested with other IARPC reports, such as the report to Congress.

Evaluate, and make recommendations regarding the development of, subsequent implementation plans.

Provide implementation updates to the IARPC Staff Group as necessary.

Direction: The IARPC Principals and Staff Group provide direction on this implementation plan. The Principals provide policy direction, suggest adjustments for future implementation plans, and, when needed, approve official IARPC reports. The Staff Group facilitates agency engagement in designing and implementing objectives, addresses issues brought forth by the Implementation Plan Integration Group, approves updates to new objectives and deliverables, and reviews and clears drafts of official IARPC reports when needed.
